public: yes
author: kit
tags: [Celery, Django, Django-Channels, UX, Code]
image:
  - src: 'blog/2017/04/17/async-notifications.jpg'
summary: |
  When you have out-of-band processing in a web app, how do you let users know
  that the status of a task has changed? Depending on your front-end client,
  there are a few different approaches you might take.


Django, Background Processes, and Keeping Users in the Loop
===========================================================

In my `last post`_, I talked about how a modern web app needs background worker
processes. One way or another, you'll have some things you need to do that are
slower than you can do in a request/response cycle, and so you'll want to
handle them out of band. Have the API return a simple ``202 ACCEPTED`` and move
on with your life, right?

.. _last post: /2017/03/20/serializing-things/

Well, sometimes you want to tell users about the state of those background
processes. You might want to say "it's done!", or "it's failed!", or even just
to acknowledge that it's taking a long time, but still going. And just saying
"they can refresh the page" isn't always enough. (Though, sometimes it is!)

I'm going to talk about different ways you can do this.

First I'll talk about how I would do it using Celery. But ``django-channels``
provides some cool new options for handling background processes, so I'll cover
that too.

Celery
------

Imagine we have a long-running background process, something that can take up
to a minute under normal circumstances, maybe more under exceptional load. We
make a Celery task to handle it, and now we want to let the user know what
state it's in.

The most simple (or simplistic) approach can be to use the database to store
state. You can do this with Celery's database result backend, or a custom task
state model that you periodically update. Imagine something like this:

.. code:: python

    @app.task
    def my_task(some_arg):
        # some unique identifier, that you can recover outside the task:
        task_id = get_task_id_based_on_arg(some_arg)
        state, _ = TaskState.objects.get_or_create(task_id=task_id)

        total = len(some_arg)
        for i, elem in enumerate(some_arg):
            process_elem(elem)
            # Every 100 elements, update the percentage processed:
            if i % 100 == 0:
                state.percent_done = (i / float(total)) * 100
                state.save()

Then in your views, you can retrieve the appropriate TaskState and show how
much has been processed. Sometimes that's a good approach, but usually I think
that's pretty clunky. It can thrash the database, leave records lying around if
things die halfway through, and still doesn't give you a smooth experience;
your user has to refresh to see updates.

As an aside, it might be tempting to do something like this with the Django
`messages framework`_. However, adding and retrieving messages requires the
``request`` object. Even the pickle serializer can fail to serialize the
request object. I would strongly recommend saving yourself the time and
trouble, and using anything but messages for this.

.. _messages framework: https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/1.11/ref/contrib/messages/

So what if you want real-time updates? What if that page refresh is bumming you
out?

A nice option is something like `Pusher`_. They provide a service that you can
push to from inside your app (in the request/response cycle, or in a background
task) using a nice Python library, and some JS to get your users talking to
their realtime websocket-y servers, to get those updates. Their JS library even
includes sensible fallbacks for when websockets aren't available. The one
caution is that their prices take a curve that can be a bit steep for some
situations; if developer time is cheaper than ongoing service costs, then it
might be worth rolling your own websocket solution. Which brings us to our next
section.

.. _Pusher: https://pusher.com/

Django-Channels
---------------

If you are using the newer Django Channels package for background tasks, this
has the added benefit of making it possible for you to make and manage your own
websockets connections.

For fuller explanation of Channels itself, see the `channels docs`_ or Jacob
Kaplan-Moss's `excellent blog post`_ on the subject. I'll give a brief overview
here, though.

.. _channels docs: https://channels.readthedocs.io/en/stable/
.. _excellent blog post: https://blog.heroku.com/in_deep_with_django_channels_the_future_of_real_time_apps_in_django

I find it helps to think of Channels as a generalization of Django's view
system. Instead of a ``urls.py`` with a ``urlpatterns`` attribute, you have a
``routing.py`` with a ``channel_routing`` attribute. Instead of mapping paths
to views, it maps channel types to consumers. Channel types can include
well-known ones like websocket events, or ad-hoc ones like custom background
tasks.

(All your views and URLs can still be there in your project, untouched, too.
This isn't instead of all that, it's in addition.)

Because Channels operate outside the usual request/response cycle, sending a
reply on a channel is a little harder. It can't operate simply through a
function's ``return``. Instead, you have to ``.send`` on Channels, or more
flexibly, Groups. (A Group just allows you to send to multiple consumers at
once, if necessary.)

So, for our purposes, your ``channel_routing`` should have, at a minimum, these
values:

.. code:: python

    channel_routing = [
        route("websocket.connect", websocket_connect),
        route("websocket.receive", websocket_receive),
        route("websocket.disconnect", websocket_disconnect),
        route("my-background-task", my_background_task),
    ]

The first three are consumers for handling basic websocket operations. The last
one is whatever long-running task you want to run in the background.

You can then call the background task in a view:

.. code:: python

    Channel('my-background-task').send(some_arguments)

Be sure that there's some stable way to identify the ``Group`` that you need to
send to. It might be as simple as passing in the username of the logged-in user
who kicked off the task, or it might be based on a process UUID that's in the
view's path, or something else. Whatever it is, when the user's browser makes a
websocket connection on page load, you'll want to add that reply channel to the
``Group``:

.. code:: python

    def websocket_connect(message):
        # Accept connection
        message.reply_channel.send({"accept": True})
        Group(get_group_id_from(message)).add(message.reply_channel)

On the front-end, you should have something like this:

.. code:: js

    socket = new WebSocket("ws://" + window.location.host);
    socket.onmessage = show_some_toast_for(message);
    // Call onopen directly if socket is already open
    if (socket.readyState == WebSocket.OPEN) socket.onopen();

And now you can push messages to users yourself:

.. code:: python

    def my_background_task(message):
        # …
        Group(get_group_id_from(message)).send({
            "text": some_status_update,
        })
        # …

And the front-end JavaScript will receive it over the websocket. Display it in
a toast or other style of your choosing, and you're good to go!

Have you tried out Channels yet? Do you have better ideas for what to do with
websockets? Let us know `Twitter`_, on our `public Slack channel`_, or through
our `handy contact form`_.

.. _Twitter: https://twitter.com/oddbird
.. _public Slack channel: http://friends.oddbird.net
.. _handy contact form: /contact/

(Header image from `Tekniska Museet`_.)

.. _Tekniska Museet: https://www.flickr.com/photos/tekniskamuseet/6984485227/in/photolist-bDcj86-bCJAcK-kuma4q-a84vA7-m9MW4X-bpxan1-5MqJ6t-qveiAk-9HUcBY-bK7X7H-bDc9G8-H4CRif-ecoWKZ-gxg8pi-gxfwdA-gxg9yo-gxganN-gxgxhM-gxgdCL-SRK9sh-g2gW4S-eWUwc-Tj1w3G-SXLqUw-kWJsG1-5nuzrQ-o6Gn1v-dn8r3R-dn8u4y-RCNiKJ-dnp4W6-82121J-Sk9roq-dn7sPf-SiTrzM-SgfCro-TmmueP-dnpnsi-SgfEp1-dnpYB5-SRnywU-RF1mQK-JP5Pxc-SFuTr9-4BrHoH-Si5fuK-Sivnqi-KKuKjn-KjmLNW-KCAU1X
