public: yes
author: sondra
tags: [OddSite, 'Open Design', Typography, Design]
image:
  - src: 'blog/2017/typography/type.jpg'
summary: |
  **How do you choose the best fonts for a brand identity** among the thousands
  of options available on the interwebs these days? Whether you’re starting
  from scratch or rebranding like us, this step-by-step guide can help focus
  and direct your process.

  First, define your brand goals. Next, explore your options. There are many
  excellect resources that offer free, high quality, and accessible fonts; I
  list 7 of my favorites in this guide. Create element collages to test your
  typeface pairings in context. Finally, vote on the best options with your
  team.
after:
  - include: 'blog/_tag-module.html.j2'
    title: 'OddSite Re-design Timeline'
    tag: 'Open Design'
    reverse: true
    id: 'open-design-articles'


How to Choose Engaging & Accessible Typography for Your Website Brand
=====================================================================

How do you choose the best fonts for a brand identity among the thousands of
options available on the interwebs these days – typography that perfectly
expresses the mood you or your client want to evoke when users encounter your
company – while also meeting accessibility standards, and standing out from the
masses? OddBird tackled this question as part of the `open redesign process`_
of this, our OddSite.

.. _open redesign process: /2016/07/12/open-design/

Whether you’re starting from scratch or rebranding like us, this step-by-step
guide can help direct your process. I’m focusing on website branding, but many
of these ideas apply to print as well. If you already have typography, but you
need a beautiful color palette, check out this guide to `choosing brand colors
for your website`_.

.. _choosing brand colors for your website: /2017/1/16/color/


Step 1 – Define Brand Goals
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

It’s hard to know whether you’ve found what you’re looking for unless you first
know what you’re looking for. Ask yourself or your client questions like these:
What is the personality/attitude of the project? What is it *not*?

After a review of our `OddSite Brand Goals`_, we knew we were looking for type
families that conjured the ideas of trustworthiness, skill and high standards
without arrogance or that rectangular corporate look. All of that plus a dash
of our odd, people-first personality (though we agreed any typeface termed cute
or flashy would be going too far).

.. _OddSite Brand Goals: /2016/11/04/branding-type/


Step 2 – Play with Typography Options and Typeface Pairings
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Now the fun part! Typography is a delight, and there are so many choices with
unique associations and histories and uses. Serifs make long chunks of small
text easier to read. Typefaces like Times New Roman, Georgia, and Baskerville
have been around forever and are often used to present serious news.
Associations like classic and trustworthy spring to mind. According to a `study
by Errol Morris`_, “Baskerville, a 250-year-old serif…was statistically more
likely to influence the minds of readers than Computer Modern, Georgia,
Helvetica, Comic Sans or Trebuchet.”

.. _study by Errol Morris: http://www.fastcodesign.com/3046365/errol-morris-how-typography-shapes-our-perception-of-truth

.. image:: /static/images/blog/2017/typography/librebaskerville.jpg

*Google Fonts – Libre Baskerville*

On the other hand sans serif, hand-drawn typefaces like Amatic SC are personal
and friendly and bring to mind trendy indie movies: *Life Inside Out*, *Frank*.
Amatic shines in titling, but would make my brain hurt if I had to read several
paragraphs at 14px size. Always check the description for each typeface to find
out what it was designed for and whether it is accessible at small sizes.

.. image:: /static/images/blog/2017/typography/amatic.jpg

*Google Fonts – Amatic SC*

Dive deep and luxuriate.

7 Resources – Free and High Quality Typography and Typeface Pairing
---------------------------------------------------------------------

`Font Squirrel`_
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

.. _Font Squirrel: https://www.fontsquirrel.com/

Font Squirrel is my go-to resource for typography. Curated for quality and free
for commercial use, Font Squirrel’s compilation of typefaces is easy to filter
and download.

.. image:: /static/images/blog/2017/typography/fontsquirrel.jpg

`Fontspring`_
~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you can’t find the perfect typeface on Font Squirrel, try its sister site
Fontspring. Their lists of thousands of high quality typefaces aren’t free, but
Fontspring has done the mind numbing work of sorting through licenses to make
the purchasing process straightforward and easy to understand for you and your
clients. Proxima Nova is a personal favorite that OddBird used for the
`CoachHub app`_.

.. _Fontspring: https://www.fontspring.com/
.. _CoachHub app: /2015/08/14/coachhub-study/

.. image:: /static/images/blog/2017/typography/fontspring.jpg

`Adobe TypeKit`_
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

If you already have an Adobe Creative Cloud subscription, then you can use
TypeKit fonts in your Adobe software and commercial web and/or print projects.
Double check the `licensing details`_ before presenting a TypeKit font option
to a client. You may find some TypeKit fonts available for free on Google Fonts
or you may run into expensive and complex license restrictions.

.. _Adobe TypeKit: https://typekit.com/
.. _licensing details: https://helpx.adobe.com/typekit/using/font-licensing.html#sync-lic

Since OddBird already subscribes to Creative Cloud, I found several font
options there: Freight Sans and Freight Text, Abril and Raleway, Merriweather
and PT Sans. Not all of these typefaces made it to our final round of element
collages, but it was an excellent place to start. `TypeKit Design Gallery`_ is
an inspiration for typeface pairing as well.

.. _TypeKit Design Gallery: https://typekit.com/gallery

.. image:: /static/images/blog/2017/typography/typekit.jpg

`Google Fonts`_
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

Google Fonts’ collection of free, open source typefaces is an excellent
resource. These fonts are all designed for the web, so you can be sure you’re
getting a legible, high quality typeface. I love reading about the foundries
and designers who designed each typeface and why. These descriptions are a
handy resource when you need to explain to clients how your typeface choices
relate back to their brand goals. Google Fonts also offers typeface pairing
suggestions with each specimen.

.. _Google Fonts: https://fonts.google.com

.. image:: /static/images/blog/2017/typography/googlefonts.jpg

`Typewolf`_
~~~~~~~~~~~

Typewolf is the first place I go to find lovely typeface pairing with samples
from live websites as well as expert recommendations. I discovered Freight Sans
and Freight Text on Typewolf.

.. _Typewolf: https://www.typewolf.com/

.. image:: /static/images/blog/2017/typography/typewolf.jpg

`Font Pair`_
~~~~~~~~~~~~

Font Pair is exclusively for pairings of Google Fonts. I love the stripped down
design. This is where I found the Raleway and Merriweather typeface pairing,
one option we considered for OddSite. Unfortunately, this pair didn’t make the
final round of cuts.

.. _Font Pair: http://fontpair.co/

.. image:: /static/images/blog/2017/typography/fontpair.jpg

`Carrie Dils`_
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

I found Carrie’s blog on TypeKit typeface pairing to be a very informative and
hilarious read. She provides intriguing insight into why her pairings work well
together.

.. _Carrie Dils: https://carriedils.com/typekit-font-pairings/

.. image:: /static/images/blog/2017/typography/carriedils.jpg

Step 3 – Test Typography and Pairings in Context
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

I can spend hours browsing typography websites. To really evaluate whether a
particular typeface will work for your project, I strongly recommend testing it
in the context of your logo or website. Try out various weights – bold, italic,
condensed – and sizes.

    In many ways, the font size is not as important as it used to be, because
    of the increased customizability of browsers and assistive technologies.
    However, it is important that your design accommodate increased text sizes
    without loss of readability or functionality.

    --`WebAIM`_

.. _WebAIM: http://webaim.org/techniques/fonts/

Additionally, avoid using all caps wherever possible. It’s more difficult to
read. Plus, **IT LOOKS LIKE YOU’RE SHOUTING**.

OddBird borrowed ideas from `Vox Product’s`_ process to test our typography
options. Our design team created typography element collages, each using the
same content from our blog. Presenting different typeface families in the same
context also made it easier for the rest of the Birds to evaluate the options.

Stacy, Miriam, and myself (Sondra), the three OddBird designers, each designed
two or three element collages. Then we met and eliminated all but the best four
before presenting to the rest of the `Birds`_. Each of the collages featured
serif fonts – trustworthiness is a brand goal – with a twist.

.. _Vox Product’s: https://product.voxmedia.com/2013/1/24/5426808/an-inside-peek-into-the-polygon-design-process
.. _Birds: /birds/

.. image:: /static/images/blog/2017/typography/elementcollagecollage.jpg

Browse our full element collages in our `Behind the Scenes post`_.

.. _Behind the Scenes post: /2016/11/04/branding-type/

Step 4 – Vote Remotely Using…GitHub?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

All the options are so amazing for different reasons. How do you narrow to just
one typeface or a single pair? (And narrowing down is important for
accessibility.)

    Using too many font faces can create a confusing visual layout, which is
    bad for all users, but may be especially difficult for users with reading
    disorders, learning disabilities, or attention deficit disorders.

    --`WebAIM`_

.. _WebAIM: http://webaim.org/techniques/fonts/

To keep the process moving forward, it helps to take a vote. There are many
ways to take a vote. `Dotmocracy`_ is a classic for team voting.

.. _Dotmocracy: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Dotmocracy

The Birds are spread out across five states and three time zones, and while we
love dot-voting, we needed a web tool to help out. We also wanted our
`OddFriends Slack channel`_ members to weigh in. After looking at several apps,
we decided to try using  `GitHub Issues`_ comments and emoji reactions.
Everyone got two votes and the process worked brilliantly with the winning
typefaces receiving six thumbs up.

.. _OddFriends Slack channel: http://friends.oddbird.net
.. _GitHub Issues: https://github.com/oddbird/oddsite/issues/49

.. image:: /static/images/blog/2017/typography/github.jpg

Pros and Cons of Freight Sans and Freight Text Font Pair
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

And the winning pair is…

OddBird chose Freight Sans for headlines and Freight Text for the body. Fun
without being flashy. Professional without being stuffy. Trustworthy yet odd.
Easy to read at a broad range of sizes. These typefaces embody the essence of
OddBird. Being from the same foundry and family, the visual harmony is
effortless.

.. image:: /static/images/blog/2017/typography/freight.jpg

..

    Designed for warm formality in text and an authoritative, helpful tone in
    display, Freight Sans eschews mannerisms of form in favor of a studied
    balance of organic and geometric shapes.

    --`Webtype`_

.. _Webtype: http://www.webtype.com/font/freight-sans-family/

Warmth, authority, helpfulness: a very accurate description of what OddBird
would like our users to experience when they work with us and land on OddSite
making Freight Sans an obvious choice to meet our brand goals.

    Freight Text series was designed for extended reading in periodicals and
    data-intensive documents.

    --`Typedia`_

.. _Typedia: http://typedia.com/explore/typeface/freight-text/

Freight Text was originally developed for print, and we love the classic feel
this evokes, but it’s also very easy to read online, especially for large
chunks of text like this blog post. Freight Text italics reminds us a bit of
Libre Baskerville – the font OddBird used previously, but Freight Text has a
little something extra – rounded edges, subtle flourishes – that sets it apart.
Unfortunately, Freight Text lacks an amazing ampersand, so we intend to `create
a custom font stack`_ and continue using Baskerville’s ampersand.

.. _create a custom font stack: https://24ways.org/2011/creating-custom-font-stacks-with-unicode-range/

Also, we’re suckers for fonts with lowercase numerals.

.. image:: /static/images/blog/2017/typography/numbers.jpg

Freight was developed by `Darden Studio`_ and is available at `Phil’s Fonts`_
as well as through TypeKit. Without a TypeKit subscription, the Freight
licenses may have been more of a hassle than we wanted to deal with, requiring
monthly pageview tracking. With TypeKit, we were golden.

.. _Darden Studio: https://www.dardenstudio.com/
.. _Phil’s Fonts: https://philsfonts.com/index.php/fonts/overview/GF060021X1

.. image:: /static/images/blog/2017/typography/darden.jpg

Getting Personal
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

I've loved typography since I was very young. Just for fun, here's my first hand-drawn alphabet from fifth grade.

.. image:: /static/images/blog/2017/typography/alphabet.jpg

What Are Your Favorite Typography Tools?
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

OddBird loves typography, and we’re big fans of sharing resources. What font
sites do you use? What is your favorite tool or method for typeface pairing?
Let’s talk web typography on the `OddFriends Slack channel`_. Typography nerds
unite!

.. callmacro:: content.macros.j2#link_button
  :url: '/2017/1/16/color/'

  How to Choose Brand Colors
